W-15082979-dw-expression-builder-advanced-config-duke (#296)
mulesoft/docs-code-builder: modules/ROOT/pages/int-configure-dw-expressions.adoc

* xref:dataweave::dataweave-variables-context.adoc[Predefined Mule variables] such as `payload`, `attributes`, `vars`.
* xref:dataweave::dataweave-selectors.adoc[DataWeave selectors] for capturing the values of fields within the payload, attribute, or variable within the xref:mule-runtime::about-mule-event.adoc[Mule event]. 

For more information, see xref:dataweave::index.adoc[]. 

[[expression-builder]]
== Expression Builder

When configuring component in your flows, use the DataWeave expression builder to ease configuration of DataWeave expressions in your components, to supply sample data for your expression, and to preview the expression's output without the need to run your Mule app with data from external sources. To construct an expression, see <<construct-expression>>. To provide your own sample data, see <<sample-data>>.

* *Data*: Illustrates the data structure with any sample data that is available. For example:
+

> image:int-dw-fx-data-tab.png["Data tab for expression field"]

Author: todo

+
The strings displayed as values for the payload and attributes, such as *"0"* and *"75"*, are not used for previewing or generating output.  

* *Functions*: Lists all DataWeave functions from all xref:dataweave::dw-functions.adoc#dw_modules[DataWeave modules], such as String, Array, and Core modules. 
+
[%header,cols="1a,1a"]
|===
| DataWeave Functions
| Function Reference

| 
Hover over a function to get a short description:

> image:int-dw-fx-functions-tab.png["Functions tab for expression field"]

Author: todo

. Start an expression:
.. Click Set Payload to display its configuration panel, and then click within its *Value* field (an *fx* field) to open the DataWeave expression builder.
+
Notice the *Data*, *Functions*, and *Preview* tabs in the expression builder.
+
TODO: ADD IMAGE
.. Click the *Functions* tab in the expression builder.
+
Notice the list of DataWeave modules, which includes Core and all other DataWeave modules. Each module contains a set of DataWeave functions. 
+
TODO: ADD IMAGE
+
//TODO: VERIFY
If you want to use a function in the Core module only, you can press Ctrl+Space (Mac) or Cmd+Space (Windows) in an empty *fx* field. If a value is already in the field, the list contains other context-specific data, such as a `default` setting or fields in the payload, for example. 
.. In the *Functions* tab, navigate to *Core* -> *++* (for concatenation).
+
Notice that you can hover over the function to get a short description of the function and that you can click *Details* to get full documentation of the function along with parameter descriptions and examples.
+

> TODO: ADD IMAGES short description and full doc

Author: fx-functions-tab-hover-all

= Configuring DataWeave Expressions
:page-aliases: int-use-dw-to-transform-data.adoc, int-address-dw-errors.adoc, int-import-dw-libraries.adoc

Configure DataWeave expressions in your integrations and implementations from the expression builder UI or from the configuration XML. Mock data for your expressions so that you can preview sample output of your expressions in Anypoint Code Builder.

> DataWeave is the programming language designed by MuleSoft for data transformation and expressions in connectors and components. When you create an implementation or integration in Anypoint Code Builder, you are creating a Mule app that runs on an instance of the Mule runtime engine. 

Author: ```suggestion
DataWeave is the programming language designed by MuleSoft for data transformation and expressions in connector operations and components. When you create an implementation or integration in Anypoint Code Builder, you are creating a Mule app that runs on an instance of the Mule runtime engine. 
```

> DataWeave is the programming language designed by MuleSoft for data transformation and expressions in connector operations and components. When you create an implementation or integration in Anypoint Code Builder, you are creating a Mule app that runs on an instance of the Mule runtime engine. 

Author: ```suggestion
DataWeave is the programming language designed by MuleSoft for data transformation and expressions in connector operations and other components that process messages (payload, attributes) and other Mule event data. When you create an implementation or integration in Anypoint Code Builder, you are creating a Mule app that runs on an instance of the Mule runtime engine. 
```

= Configuring DataWeave Expressions
:page-aliases: int-use-dw-to-transform-data.adoc, int-address-dw-errors.adoc, int-import-dw-libraries.adoc

Configure DataWeave expressions in your integrations and implementations from the expression builder UI or from the configuration XML. Mock data for your expressions so that you can preview sample output of your expressions in Anypoint Code Builder.

> DataWeave is the programming language designed by MuleSoft for data transformation and expressions in connector operations and other components that process messages (payload, attributes) and other Mule event data. When you create an implementation or integration in Anypoint Code Builder, you are creating a Mule app that runs on an instance of the Mule runtime engine. 

Reviewer: Could switch to have user action first - Transform data and expressions....

Author: The action is in the first paragraph. The second is a description of DataWeave. I think this construction works for its purpose.

== Before You Begin

> It is important to have a basic understanding of the DataWeave language. DataWeave expressions accept the following: 

Reviewer: I try to avoid "It is important" construction.

Maybe make this a bullet...?
```
* Understand the basics of the DataWeave language:
+
DataWeave expressions...
```

> * xref:dataweave::dw-functions.adoc[DataWeave functions and operators] and data types that their parameters accept. For example, the concatenation function (xref:dataweave::dw-core-functions-plusplus.adoc[++]) accepts strings, arrays, objects, date-related data types, and so on. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* xref:dataweave::dw-functions.adoc[DataWeave functions and operators] and data types that their parameters accept.
+
For example, the concatenation function (xref:dataweave::dw-core-functions-plusplus.adoc[++]) accepts strings, arrays, objects, and date-related data types. 
```

Reviewer: (for scannability)

+

> You can also get function documentation from the IDE. For example, see <<tab-functions>>.

Reviewer: This ("also") seems like there's something missing. 

What about something like "The IDE provides built-in documentation for functions."

* xref:dataweave::dataweave-variables-context.adoc[Predefined Mule variables] such as `payload`, `attributes`, `vars`.

> * xref:dataweave::dataweave-selectors.adoc[DataWeave selectors] for capturing the values of fields within the payload, attribute, or variable within the xref:mule-runtime::about-mule-event.adoc[Mule event]. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* xref:dataweave::dataweave-selectors.adoc[DataWeave selectors] for capturing the values of fields within the payload, an attribute, or a variable within the xref:mule-runtime::about-mule-event.adoc[Mule event]. 
```

Reviewer: or "a variable"?

For more resources, see xref:dataweave::index.adoc[]. 

[[open-fx-field]]
== Open an Expression (fx) Field 

> Most connector operations and components have at least one field that accepts DataWeave expressions and scripts. In the configuration panel for a component, these fields are identified by an *fx* above the field. In the XML, these fields have `#[]` markup. Expression fields accept DataWeave expressions, including DataWeave functions and Mule event data, such as `payload`, `attributes`, and `vars`. 

Reviewer: have -> include? 

Is there a more precise word than have? If not, fine.

Author: provide? include? contain? I don't know if it will make a difference in the meaning to anyone. ¯\_(ツ)_/¯

> Open a component's expression field: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To open a component's expression field: 
```

. Open a component that accepts expressions from the canvas in your implementation or integration project. 
+
. Click *fx* above the field to change the field from a string field to an expression field. For example:
+
image::int-dw-fx-field-set-variable.png["Expression (fx) field in Set Variable"]
+

> The markup `#[]` in the *fx* field also appears in the XML to indicate that the field is for an expression. For example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The markup `#[]` in the *fx* field also appears in the XML to indicate that the field is for an expression, for example:
```

+
----
<set-variable variableName="variableName" value="#[]" 
              doc:name="Set variable" doc:id="ndpiap" />
----

> . Click inside the field to open the expression builder for the component. For example:

Reviewer: This procedure would be good as a little video, I think...

> . Click inside the field to open the expression builder for the component. For example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Click inside the field to open the expression builder for the component, for example:
```

+
image::int-dw-fx-expression-builder.png["Expression builder for Set Variable"]
+

> Use the *Data*, *Functions*, and *Preview* tabs to ease configuration of expressions in your components and to preview the expression's output without the need to run your Mule app with data from external sources:

Reviewer: Flip to put user value first? 

To configure expressions in your components, use the *Data* and *Functions* tabs.
To preview the expression's output without running your Mule app with data from external sources, use the *Preview* tab.
```

Author: Not sure this will cause confusions as written. The description is below an image. There are links to the specifics below that.

Author: ```suggestion
Use the *Data*, *Functions*, and *Preview* tabs to ease configuration of expressions in your components. You can preview the expression's output without the need to run your Mule app with data from external sources:
```

* <<tab-data>>
* <<tab-functions>>
* <<tab-preview>>
 
[[tab-data]]
== Check the Data Structure

> The *Data* tab provides the data structure of the Mule event, including the payload, attributes, and Mule variables. The tab includes any sample data. This tab is part of the expression builder for a component's *fx* field. For example:

Reviewer: Any way to make this less UI-focused?

To view the data structure...., use the Data tab.

Author: I really feel that the the title of the section does that work.

[%header,cols="1a,1a"]
|===
| *Data* tab (with autogenerated data) | *Data* tab (expanded)

| 
image:int-dw-fx-data-tab.png["Data tab for expression field"]
| 
image:int-dw-fx-data-tab-attributes.png["Data tab for expression field with mock attributes"]
|===

> An autogenerated strings (such as "dictum" in the payload example) are displayed as a mock values and are used to generate output for previews, such as in the <<tab-preview, Preview tab>>. The attribute metadata keys in the example come from an HTTP Listener configuration in the flow.

Author: @anandsknair Your feedback (thank you!) is incorporated above.  ☝️

> An autogenerated strings (such as "dictum" in the payload example) are displayed as a mock values and are used to generate output for previews, such as in the <<tab-preview, Preview tab>>. The attribute metadata keys in the example come from an HTTP Listener configuration in the flow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Any autogenerated strings (such as "dictum" in the payload example) are displayed as mock values and are used to generate output for previews, such as in the <<tab-preview, Preview tab>>. The attribute metadata keys in the example come from an HTTP Listener configuration in the flow.
```

> An autogenerated strings (such as "dictum" in the payload example) are displayed as a mock values and are used to generate output for previews, such as in the <<tab-preview, Preview tab>>. The attribute metadata keys in the example come from an HTTP Listener configuration in the flow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Any autogenerated strings (such as "dictum" in the payload example) are displayed as mock values and are used to generate output for previews, such as in the <<tab-preview, Preview tab>>. The attribute metadata keys in the example come from an HTTP Listener configuration in the flow.
```

Reviewer: Or "An autogenerated string" is displayed as a mock value...

> An autogenerated strings (such as "dictum" in the payload example) are displayed as a mock values. Autogenerated values are _not_ used to generate output for previews, such as in the <<tab-preview, Preview tab>>. The attribute metadata keys in the example come from an HTTP Listener configuration in the flow.

Author: ```suggestion
An autogenerated strings (such as "dictum" in the payload example) are displayed as a mock values and are used to generate output for previews, such as in the <<tab-preview, Preview tab>>. The attribute metadata keys in the example come from an HTTP Listener configuration in the flow.
```

> The *Input/Output* tab in component configuration panels, provides the structure of the Mule event data as it enters the component (*Input*) and the structure that the component outputs (*Output*). For example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The *Input/Output* tab in component configuration panels provides the structure of the Mule event data as it enters the component (*Input*) and the structure that the component outputs (*Output*), for example:
```

Reviewer: User task first?

To view the structure...

image:int-dw-fx-input-output-sample.png["Input/Output tab for a component"]

[[tab-functions]]
== List DataWeave Functions and Get Documentation

> Get a list of available functions from a component's *Functions* tab, the *fx* field, or the auto-complete menu in the XML editor.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To get a list of available functions from a component's *Functions* tab, the *fx* field, or the auto-complete menu in the XML editor:
```

. Open a component that has an *fx* expression field. 
+
For guidance, see <<open-fx-field>>.
. List available functions:

> *  To display a list of DataWeave functions from the Core module from an empty *fx* field, press Ctrl+Space in an _empty_ *fx* field. For example:

Reviewer: Does this format correctly with the extra space?

Author: yeah, it formats correctly

+
image::int-dw-fx-field-autocomplete.png["Expression builder for Set Variable"]
* To display functions from all xref:dataweave::dw-functions.adoc#dw_modules[DataWeave modules], such as String, Array, and Core modules:

.. Click the *fx* field to open the expression builder. 

> .. Click the *Functions* tab in the expression builder. For example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. Click the *Functions* tab in the expression builder, for example:
```

+
[%header,cols="1a,1a"]
|===
| DataWeave Functions
| Function Reference

| 
Hover over a function to get a short description:

image:int-dw-fx-functions-tab.png["Functions tab for expression field"]
|
Click *Details* to get complete documentation:

image:int-dw-fx-functions-tab-details.png["Data tab for expression field"]
|===

[[tab-preview]]
== Preview Output of DataWeave Expressions 

> Preview output of DataWeave expressions from the canvas or from the XML editor. The preview feature acts on sample data that you provide from the configuration XML for the payload (`payload`) or Mule variables (for example, `vars.somevar`) in your *fx* (expression) field. 

Reviewer: I think some of these intros would read better if you included "You can" or something like that, like on line 134.

Author: I'm actually trying to avoid that construction. Do you think this construction is confusing?

To provide your own sample data, see <<sample-data>>.

* <<preview-results-fx>>
* <<preview-results-xml>>

[[preview-results-fx]]
=== Preview Results in the UI

Preview auto-generated sample data, or preview your own sample data. Preview the output in the *Preview* tab of the expression builder for a component's expression field.

[%header,cols="1a,1a"]
|===

> | Preview Auto-generated Sample Data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Preview Auto-Generated Sample Data
```

Reviewer: I had to look this up:
https://confluence.internal.salesforce.com/x/HQSGC

| Preview Your Sample Data

| 

> Outputting results from auto-generated sample data:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Output results from auto-generated sample data:
```

Reviewer: Not sure if that suggestion works, but "outputting" feels strange to me...

Author: This is one type of result that you can produce.

image:int-dw-fx-preview-tab.png["Functions tab for expression field"]
|

> Outputting results from an expression with user-created sample data:

Reviewer: Salesforce avoids gerunds as a rule: https://confluence.internal.salesforce.com/x/3uDaF

Author: ok, I see this now saying it could be hard to translate or understand for non-native English speakers

image:int-dw-fx-preview-tab-output.png["Data tab for expression field"]
|===

You can apply DataWeave selectors and functions to your sample data. To create sample data that has the structure and data types you expect, see <<sample-data>>.

[[preview-results-xml]]
=== Preview Results from the XML Editor

To preview the results from the configuration XML, place the cursor within your DataWeave code, click the *Show Code Actions* icon, and then click *Run Preview*:

image::function-validation-run-preview.png["Run Preview"]

Anypoint Code Builder opens a new *Preview Output* tab with the result of the function:

image::dataweave-function-preview-output.png["Preview Output tab]

[[sample-data]]
== Provide Sample Data for a DataWeave Expression

> Add sample data for Mule variables, such as `payload` in *fx* fields so that you can test and preview DataWeave expressions in your components locally, without running your application to retrieve Mule event data from an external source.

Reviewer: user action/value first?

Author: ???

Reviewer: To test and preview...., add sample...

You can create sample data in the following formats:

* JSON
* XML
* CSV

> [[important]]

Reviewer: I guess you link to this admonition from elsewhere?

Author: yes

[IMPORTANT] 
====

> * To avoid errors when you run your app with real data, the sample data you provide must match the basic structure, format, and data type of the real data that the expression will receive.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* To avoid errors when you run your app with real data, provide sample data that matches the basic structure, format, and data type of the real data the expression will receive.
```

* Your sample data is overwritten when you reopen the component from the canvas.
====

To create sample data for a Mule variable:

. Open your project. 

> . In the XML editor, hover over the Mule variable (such as `payload` or `attributes`) to open the . For example:

Reviewer: Something's missing here.

Also (channeling Kim): ", for example:"

Author: I hope we can settle on this bc I get different guidance from different people.

Reviewer: https://confluence.internal.salesforce.com/display/MTDT/MuleSoft+CX+Writing+Style+Reference#MuleSoftCXWritingStyleReference-%22forexample%22

+

> image::int-dw-sample-quick-fix-hover.png["Hovering over Quick Fix in the configuration XML file"]

Reviewer: Suggest alt text that describes what appears - Quick Fix menu in the configuration XML file (or something)

> . Click *Quick Fix* to open the Quick Fix menu.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Click *Quick Fix* to open the *Quick Fix* menu.
```

Reviewer: If it's considered a UI element...

> . Select *Create sample data for _your-value_*, such as *Create sample data for payload*. For example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Select *Create sample data for _your-value_*, such as *Create sample data for payload*, for example:
```

+

> image::int-dw-sample-quick-fix-create.png["Creating a Quick Fix from the configuration XML file"]

Reviewer: More descriptive alt text? If not, suggest using imperative rather than gerund.

> . In the menu that opens, select a format for the sample data, such as JSON. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. In the menu that opens, select a format, such as JSON, for the sample data. 
```

Reviewer: I like to put the "such as" closer to the thing it elaborates on.

+
image::dw-issue-sample-data-formats.png["Menu of sample data file formats"]
+
The IDE opens a tab for your sample data. 
. Add content in the selected format to the sample data file. For example, for JSON:
+

> image::int-dw-sample-quick-fix-example-dir.png["Sample data files in the project directory"]

Reviewer: Should this alt text mention JSON? And does it need to mention project directory (you haven't mentioned it before in text)?

Author: I don't think it's important, especially since the sentence above it says "for JSON," but I"m assuming they're getting info sequentially, where image immediatly follows "For example, for JSON:"

+

> Notice that the file name is `payload.json`. Sample data files for your sample data and for the autocreated sample data are stored in the project directory `src/test/resources`.

Reviewer: This "notice" is a hanging paragraph (as I'd expect).

Reviewer: Any way to reduce the number of mentions of "sample data" in that sentence?

Author: done

+ 

> See <<important, Important>> before adding sample data.

Reviewer: I wonder if this could be something like "Important Note" or something.

Author: The title of the admonition is "Important". I think this follows a pattern similar to what we use for sections.

+

> Hovering over the value in the XML editor now displays the structure, data keys, and data types of your sample data. For example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Hover over the value in the XML editor to display the structure, data keys, and data types of your sample data, for example:
```

+

> image::int-dw-sample-quick-fix-example-hover-xml.png["Hovering over XML to display sample data"]

Reviewer: Sample data in XML hover menu? Or something?

Author: I'm honestly not clear what the rationale for this change is.

. Preview your sample data from the expression builder UI:
.. From the canvas UI, click the component that contains your sample data to open the expression builder for that field. 
.. Click the expression field of the component that has sample data to open the expression builder for that field. 
.. Click *Preview* to display the sample data. For example:
+

> image::int-dw-sample-quick-fix-example-preview.png["Previewing sample data in the expression builder"]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
image::int-dw-sample-quick-fix-example-preview.png["Sample data preview in the expression builder"]
```

+

> You can modify the value, for example, by adding DataWeave selectors or functions. For example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can modify the value. For example, add DataWeave selectors or functions:
```

Reviewer: Not sure if that changes the meaning. Trying to get away from the double "for example" here.

+

> image::int-dw-sample-quick-fix-example-preview-modified.png["Previewing sample data"]

Reviewer: Something like "Modify sample data in preview"?

+
The example now returns an array of `id` values.

[[address-dw-errors]]
== Address DataWeave Errors

When your DataWeave code contains a syntactic or semantic error, Anypoint Code Builder highlights the error and offers a suggested fix.

> * <<fix-dw-add-import>>

Reviewer: For these mini-TOCs, it might be good to connect the intro to the bullet list somehow.

Author: done

* <<fix-dw-error>>

[[fix-dw-add-import]]
=== Add a Missing Import Directive for a DataWeave Module

> Many DataWeave modules require an explicit `import` directive in the expression. Only the Core module does not require an this directive. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Many DataWeave modules require an explicit `import` directive in the expression. Only the Core module doesn't require this directive. 
```

> For example, the function `camelize( "hello world")` produces an error `Unable to resolve the reference of 'camelize'` if you do not import the String module to which this function belongs. 

Reviewer: spacing correct?

> For example, the function `camelize( "hello world")` produces an error `Unable to resolve the reference of 'camelize'` if you do not import the String module to which this function belongs. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, if you don't import the String module to which this function belongs, the function `camelize( "hello world")` produces an error `Unable to resolve the reference of 'camelize'`:
```

[source,xml]
----
<set-payload value='#[ camelize( "hello world")]' doc:name="Set payload" doc:id="vyvcds" />
----

The expression builder identifies the error. For example:

> image::int-dw-fx-error-add-import.png["Import required"]

Reviewer: "Expression builder with "import required" error" or something

> To fix this issue, click to add the import directive automatically. For example:

Reviewer: Click <something>?

> To fix this issue, click to add the import directive automatically. For example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To fix this issue, click to add the import directive automatically, for example:
```

> image::int-dw-fx-error-fix-import.png["Import required"]

Reviewer: same alt text as previous image.

Author: ```suggestion
image::int-dw-fx-error-fix-import.png["Import required error"]
```

----

[[fix-dw-error]]
=== Fix an Undefined Function Error

Anypoint Code Builder flags undefined functions automatically.

For example, in this code, DataWeave flags an error with `toUpper`:

image::dw-error.png["Undefined function error"]

When you place your cursor on the function, DataWeave provides information about the error:

image::undefined-function.png["Information about the undefined function error"]

To fix this issue:

. Click the error to display the popup.
. Click *Quick Fix*, and then click *Create Function*.
+
Anypoint Code Builder automatically adds a function definition with the `???` placeholder for you to define your function:
+
[source,DataWeave]
fun toUpper(param0: String) = ???

. Update the function to use the `upper` function to return the provided String in uppercase characters:
+
[source,DataWeave]
--
<set-payload value="#[%dw 2.0
fun toUpper(param0: String) = upper(param0)
output application/json
---
toUpper('hello')]" doc:name="Set payload" doc:id="xiyfpa" />
--

[[import-library]]
== Import a DataWeave Library

Use Anypoint Code Builder to import DataWeave libraries from Exchange into your Mule application.

> A DataWeave library is a reusable package of DataWeave modules and mapping files, and resource files, such as JSON, XML, and CSV.

Reviewer: do you need something about file formats here?

Author: ???

Reviewer: Just that JSON, XML, and CSV don't describe resource files. They describe file formats.

Author: They definitely are resource files.

Author: .json, .xml, .csv

= Configuring DataWeave Expressions
:page-aliases: int-use-dw-to-transform-data.adoc, int-address-dw-errors.adoc, int-import-dw-libraries.adoc

Configure DataWeave expressions in your integrations and implementations from the expression builder UI or from the configuration XML. Mock data for your expressions so that you can preview sample output of your expressions in Anypoint Code Builder.

DataWeave is the programming language designed by MuleSoft for data transformation and expressions in connector operations and other components that process messages (payload, attributes) and other Mule event data. When you create an implementation or integration in Anypoint Code Builder, you are creating a Mule app that runs on an instance of the Mule runtime engine. 

== Before You Begin

> It is important to have a basic understanding of the DataWeave language. DataWeave expressions accept the following: 

Author: ```suggestion
Understand the basics of the DataWeave language. 

DataWeave expressions accept the following: 
```

* xref:dataweave::dw-functions.adoc[DataWeave functions and operators] and data types that their parameters accept.
+
For example, the concatenation function (xref:dataweave::dw-core-functions-plusplus.adoc[++]) accepts strings, arrays, objects, and date-related data types. 
+

> You can also get function documentation from the IDE. For example, see <<tab-functions>>.

Author: ```suggestion
The IDE also provides built-in documentation for functions. For example, see <<tab-functions>>.
```

|===
| DataWeave Functions
| Function Reference

| 
Hover over a function to get a short description:

image:int-dw-fx-functions-tab.png["Functions tab for expression field"]
|
Click *Details* to get complete documentation:

image:int-dw-fx-functions-tab-details.png["Data tab for expression field"]
|===

[[tab-preview]]
== Preview Output of DataWeave Expressions 

Preview output of DataWeave expressions from the canvas or from the XML editor. The preview feature acts on sample data that you provide from the configuration XML for the payload (`payload`) or Mule variables (for example, `vars.somevar`) in your *fx* (expression) field. 

To provide your own sample data, see <<sample-data>>.

* <<preview-results-fx>>
* <<preview-results-xml>>

[[preview-results-fx]]
=== Preview Results in the UI

Preview auto-generated sample data, or preview your own sample data. Preview the output in the *Preview* tab of the expression builder for a component's expression field.

[%header,cols="1a,1a"]
|===
| Preview Auto-Generated Sample Data
| Preview Your Sample Data

| 
Outputting results from auto-generated sample data:

image:int-dw-fx-preview-tab.png["Functions tab for expression field"]
|

> Outputting results from an expression with user-created sample data:

Author: ```suggestion
Outputs results from an expression with user-created sample data:
```

[[preview-results-xml]]
=== Preview Results from the XML Editor

To preview the results from the configuration XML, place the cursor within your DataWeave code, click the *Show Code Actions* icon, and then click *Run Preview*:

image::function-validation-run-preview.png["Run Preview"]

Anypoint Code Builder opens a new *Preview Output* tab with the result of the function:

image::dataweave-function-preview-output.png["Preview Output tab]

[[sample-data]]
== Provide Sample Data for a DataWeave Expression

Add sample data for Mule variables, such as `payload` in *fx* fields so that you can test and preview DataWeave expressions in your components locally, without running your application to retrieve Mule event data from an external source.

You can create sample data in the following formats:

* JSON
* XML
* CSV

[[important]]
[IMPORTANT] 
====

* To avoid errors when you run your app with real data, provide sample data that matches the basic structure, format, and data type of the real data the expression will receive.
* Your sample data is overwritten when you reopen the component from the canvas.
====

To create sample data for a Mule variable:

. Open your project. 

> . In the XML editor, hover over the Mule variable (such as `payload` or `attributes`) to open the . For example:

Author: ```suggestion
. In the XML editor, hover over the Mule variable (such as `payload` or `attributes`) to open the , for example:
```

+

> image::int-dw-sample-quick-fix-hover.png["Hovering over Quick Fix in the configuration XML file"]

Author: ```suggestion
image::int-dw-sample-quick-fix-hover.png["Hovering over Quick Fix in the configuration XML file"]
```
```suggestion
image::int-dw-sample-quick-fix-hover.png["Quick Fix in the configuration XML file"]
```

. Click *Quick Fix* to open the *Quick Fix* menu.
. Select *Create sample data for _your-value_*, such as *Create sample data for payload*, for example:
+

> image::int-dw-sample-quick-fix-create.png["Creating a Quick Fix from the configuration XML file"]

Author: ```suggestion
image::int-dw-sample-quick-fix-create.png["Creating a Quick Fix from the configuration XML file"]
```
```suggestion
image::int-dw-sample-quick-fix-create.png["Perform Quick Fix action from the configuration XML file"]
```

. In the menu that opens, select a format for the sample data, such as JSON. 
+
image::dw-issue-sample-data-formats.png["Menu of sample data file formats"]
+
The IDE opens a tab for your sample data. 
. Add content in the selected format to the sample data file. For example, for JSON:
+
image::int-dw-sample-quick-fix-example-dir.png["Sample data files in the project directory"]
+

> Notice that the file name is `payload.json`. Sample data files for your sample data and for the autocreated sample data are stored in the project directory `src/test/resources`.

Author: ```suggestion
Notice that the file name is `payload.json`. Files for your sample data and for the autocreated sample data are stored in the project directory `src/test/resources`.
```

+ 
See <<important, Important>> before adding sample data.
+
Hover over the value in the XML editor to display the structure, data keys, and data types of your sample data, for example:
+

> image::int-dw-sample-quick-fix-example-hover-xml.png["Hovering over XML to display sample data"]

Author: ```suggestion
image::int-dw-sample-quick-fix-example-hover-xml.png["Hover over XML to display sample data"]
```

. Preview your sample data from the expression builder UI:
.. From the canvas UI, click the component that contains your sample data to open the expression builder for that field. 
.. Click the expression field of the component that has sample data to open the expression builder for that field. 
.. Click *Preview* to display the sample data. For example:
+
image::int-dw-sample-quick-fix-example-preview.png["Sample data preview in the expression builder"]
+
You can modify the value. For example, add DataWeave selectors or functions:
+

> image::int-dw-sample-quick-fix-example-preview-modified.png["Previewing sample data"]

Author: ```suggestion
image::int-dw-sample-quick-fix-example-preview-modified.png["Previewing sample data"]
```
```suggestion
image::int-dw-sample-quick-fix-example-preview-modified.png["Preview modified sample data"]
```

+
The example now returns an array of `id` values.

[[address-dw-errors]]
== Address DataWeave Errors

When your DataWeave code contains a syntactic or semantic error, Anypoint Code Builder highlights the error and offers a suggested fix.

> * <<fix-dw-add-import>>

Author: ```suggestion

You can troubleshoot the following issues:

* <<fix-dw-add-import>>
```

* <<fix-dw-error>>

[[fix-dw-add-import]]
=== Add a Missing Import Directive for a DataWeave Module

Many DataWeave modules require an explicit `import` directive in the expression. Only the Core module doesn't require this directive. 

For example, if you don't import the String module to which this function belongs, the function `camelize( "hello world")` produces an error `Unable to resolve the reference of 'camelize'`.

[source,xml]
----
<set-payload value='#[ camelize( "hello world")]' doc:name="Set payload" doc:id="vyvcds" />
----

The expression builder identifies the error. For example:

> image::int-dw-fx-error-add-import.png["Import required"]

Author: ```suggestion
image::int-dw-fx-error-add-import.png["'Import required' error"]
```

= Configuring DataWeave Expressions
:page-aliases: int-use-dw-to-transform-data.adoc, int-address-dw-errors.adoc, int-import-dw-libraries.adoc

Configure DataWeave expressions in your integrations and implementations from the expression builder UI or from the configuration XML. Mock data for your expressions so that you can preview sample output of your expressions in Anypoint Code Builder.

> DataWeave is the programming language designed by MuleSoft for data transformation and expressions in connector operations and other components that process messages (payload, attributes) and other Mule event data. When you create an implementation or integration in Anypoint Code Builder, you are creating a Mule app that runs on an instance of the Mule runtime engine. 

Author: ```suggestion
DataWeave is the programming language designed by MuleSoft for data transformation and expressions in connector operations and other components that process messages (payload and attributes) and other Mule event data. When you create an implementation or integration in Anypoint Code Builder, you are creating a Mule app that runs on an instance of the Mule runtime engine. 
```

== Before You Begin

Understand the basics of the DataWeave language. 

DataWeave expressions accept the following: 

* xref:dataweave::dw-functions.adoc[DataWeave functions and operators] and data types that their parameters accept.
+
For example, the concatenation function (xref:dataweave::dw-core-functions-plusplus.adoc[++]) accepts strings, arrays, objects, and date-related data types. 
+
The IDE also provides built-in documentation for functions. For example, see <<tab-functions>>.

> * xref:dataweave::dataweave-variables-context.adoc[Predefined Mule variables] such as `payload`, `attributes`, `vars`.

Author: ```suggestion
* xref:dataweave::dataweave-variables-context.adoc[Predefined Mule event variables] such as `payload`, `attributes`, `vars`.
```

To open a component's expression field: 

. Open a component that accepts expressions from the canvas in your implementation or integration project. 
+
. Click *fx* above the field to change the field from a string field to an expression field. For example:
+
image::int-dw-fx-field-set-variable.png["Expression (fx) field in Set Variable"]
+
The markup `#[]` in the *fx* field also appears in the XML to indicate that the field is for an expression, for example:
+
----
<set-variable variableName="variableName" value="#[]" 
              doc:name="Set variable" doc:id="ndpiap" />
----
. Click inside the field to open the expression builder for the component, for example:
+
image::int-dw-fx-expression-builder.png["Expression builder for Set Variable"]
+
Use the *Data*, *Functions*, and *Preview* tabs to ease configuration of expressions in your components and to preview the expression's output without the need to run your Mule app with data from external sources:

* <<tab-data>>
* <<tab-functions>>
* <<tab-preview>>
 
[[tab-data]]
== Check the Data Structure

> The *Data* tab provides the data structure of the Mule event, including the payload, attributes, and Mule variables. The tab includes any sample data. This tab is part of the expression builder for a component's *fx* field. For example:

Author: ```suggestion
To review the data structure of the Mule event, including the payload, attributes, and Mule variables, use the *Data* tab. The tab includes any sample data and is part of the expression builder for a component's *fx* field. For example:
```

[%header,cols="1a,1a"]
|===
| Preview Auto-Generated Sample Data
| Preview Your Sample Data

| 
Output results from auto-generated sample data:

image:int-dw-fx-preview-tab.png["Functions tab for expression field"]
|
Outputs results from an expression with user-created sample data:

image:int-dw-fx-preview-tab-output.png["Data tab for expression field"]
|===

You can apply DataWeave selectors and functions to your sample data. To create sample data that has the structure and data types you expect, see <<sample-data>>.

[[preview-results-xml]]
=== Preview Results from the XML Editor

To preview the results from the configuration XML, place the cursor within your DataWeave code, click the *Show Code Actions* icon, and then click *Run Preview*:

image::function-validation-run-preview.png["Run Preview"]

Anypoint Code Builder opens a new *Preview Output* tab with the result of the function:

image::dataweave-function-preview-output.png["Preview Output tab]

[[sample-data]]
== Provide Sample Data for a DataWeave Expression

> To test and preview DataWeave expressions in your components locally, without running your application to retrieve Mule event data from an external source., add sample data for Mule variables, such as `payload` in *fx* fields.

Author: ```suggestion
To test and preview DataWeave expressions in your components locally, without running your application to retrieve Mule event data from an external source, add sample data for Mule variables, such as `payload` in *fx* fields.
```

You can create sample data in the following formats:

* JSON
* XML
* CSV

[[important]]
[IMPORTANT] 
====

* To avoid errors when you run your app with real data, provide sample data that matches the basic structure, format, and data type of the real data the expression will receive.
* Your sample data is overwritten when you reopen the component from the canvas.
====

To create sample data for a Mule variable:

. Open your project. 

> . In the XML editor, hover over the Mule variable (such as `payload` or `attributes`) to open the , for example:

Author: ```suggestion
. In the XML editor, hover over the Mule event variable (such as `payload`) to open the , for example:
```

+
image::int-dw-sample-quick-fix-hover.png["Quick Fix in the configuration XML file"]
. Click *Quick Fix* to open the *Quick Fix* menu.
. Select *Create sample data for _your-value_*, such as *Create sample data for payload*, for example:
+
image::int-dw-sample-quick-fix-create.png["Perform Quick Fix action from the configuration XML file"]
. In the menu that opens, select a format, such as JSON, for the sample data. 
+
image::dw-issue-sample-data-formats.png["Menu of sample data file formats"]
+
The IDE opens a tab for your sample data. 
. Add content in the selected format to the sample data file. For example, for JSON:
+
image::int-dw-sample-quick-fix-example-dir.png["Sample data files in the project directory"]
+
Notice that the file name is `payload.json`. Files for your sample data and for the autocreated sample data are stored in the project directory `src/test/resources`.
+ 

> See <<important, Important>> before adding sample data.

Author: ```suggestion
See the <<important, Important>> note before adding sample data.
```

== Before You Begin

Understand the basics of the DataWeave language. 

DataWeave expressions accept the following: 

* xref:dataweave::dw-functions.adoc[DataWeave functions and operators] and data types that their parameters accept.
+
For example, the concatenation function (xref:dataweave::dw-core-functions-plusplus.adoc[++]) accepts strings, arrays, objects, and date-related data types. 
+
The IDE also provides built-in documentation for functions. For example, see <<tab-functions>>.
* xref:dataweave::dataweave-variables-context.adoc[Predefined Mule variables] such as `payload`, `attributes`, `vars`.
* xref:dataweave::dataweave-selectors.adoc[DataWeave selectors] for capturing the values of fields within the payload, an attribute, or a variable within the xref:mule-runtime::about-mule-event.adoc[Mule event]. 

For more resources, see xref:dataweave::index.adoc[]. 

[[open-fx-field]]
== Open an Expression (fx) Field 

> Most connector operations and components have at least one field that accepts DataWeave expressions and scripts. In the configuration panel for a component, these fields are identified by an *fx* above the field. In the XML, these fields have `#[]` markup. Expression fields accept DataWeave expressions, including DataWeave functions and Mule event data, such as `payload`, `attributes`, and `vars`. 

Author: ```suggestion
Most connector operations and components have at least one field that accepts DataWeave expressions and scripts. In the configuration panel for a component, these fields are identified by an *fx* above the field. In the XML, these fields have `#[]` markup. Expression fields accept DataWeave expressions, including DataWeave functions and Mule event data, such as `payload`, `attributes`, and `vars`. 
```
```suggestion
Most connector operations and components provide at least one field that accepts DataWeave expressions and scripts. In the configuration panel for a component, these fields are identified by an *fx* above the field. In the XML, these fields have `#[]` markup. Expression fields accept DataWeave expressions, including DataWeave functions and Mule event data, such as `payload`, `attributes`, and `vars`. 
```

[%header,cols="1a,1a"]
|===
| *Data* tab (with autogenerated data) | *Data* tab (expanded)

| 
image:int-dw-fx-data-tab.png["Data tab for expression field"]
| 
image:int-dw-fx-data-tab-attributes.png["Data tab for expression field with mock attributes"]
|===

Any autogenerated strings (such as "dictum" in the payload example) are displayed as mock values and are used to generate output for previews, such as in the <<tab-preview, Preview tab>>. The attribute metadata keys in the example come from an HTTP Listener configuration in the flow.

The *Input/Output* tab in component configuration panels provides the structure of the Mule event data as it enters the component (*Input*) and the structure that the component outputs (*Output*), for example:

image:int-dw-fx-input-output-sample.png["Input/Output tab for a component"]

[[tab-functions]]
== List DataWeave Functions and Get Documentation

To get a list of available functions from a component's *Functions* tab, the *fx* field, or the auto-complete menu in the XML editor:

. Open a component that has an *fx* expression field. 
+
For guidance, see <<open-fx-field>>.
. List available functions:

> *  To display a list of DataWeave functions from the Core module from an empty *fx* field, press Ctrl+Space in an _empty_ *fx* field. For example:

Author: ```suggestion
* To display a list of DataWeave functions from the Core module from an empty *fx* field, press Ctrl+Space in an _empty_ *fx* field. For example:
```

[%header,cols="1a,1a"]
|===
| Preview Auto-Generated Sample Data
| Preview Your Sample Data

| 
Output results from auto-generated sample data:

image:int-dw-fx-preview-tab.png["Functions tab for expression field"]
|
Outputs results from an expression with user-created sample data:

image:int-dw-fx-preview-tab-output.png["Data tab for expression field"]
|===

You can apply DataWeave selectors and functions to your sample data. To create sample data that has the structure and data types you expect, see <<sample-data>>.

[[preview-results-xml]]
=== Preview Results from the XML Editor

To preview the results from the configuration XML, place the cursor within your DataWeave code, click the *Show Code Actions* icon, and then click *Run Preview*:

image::function-validation-run-preview.png["Run Preview"]

Anypoint Code Builder opens a new *Preview Output* tab with the result of the function:

image::dataweave-function-preview-output.png["Preview Output tab]

[[sample-data]]
== Provide Sample Data for a DataWeave Expression

> Add sample data for Mule variables, such as `payload` in *fx* fields so that you can test and preview DataWeave expressions in your components locally, without running your application to retrieve Mule event data from an external source.

Author: ```suggestion
To test and preview DataWeave expressions in your components locally, without running your application to retrieve Mule event data from an external source., add sample data for Mule variables, such as `payload` in *fx* fields.
```

+
Notice that the file name is `payload.json`. Files for your sample data and for the autocreated sample data are stored in the project directory `src/test/resources`.
+ 
See <<important, Important>> before adding sample data.
+
Hover over the value in the XML editor to display the structure, data keys, and data types of your sample data, for example:
+
image::int-dw-sample-quick-fix-example-hover-xml.png["Hover over XML to display sample data"]
. Preview your sample data from the expression builder UI:
.. From the canvas UI, click the component that contains your sample data to open the expression builder for that field. 
.. Click the expression field of the component that has sample data to open the expression builder for that field. 
.. Click *Preview* to display the sample data. For example:
+
image::int-dw-sample-quick-fix-example-preview.png["Sample data preview in the expression builder"]
+
You can modify the value. For example, add DataWeave selectors or functions:
+
image::int-dw-sample-quick-fix-example-preview-modified.png["Preview modified sample data"]
+
The example now returns an array of `id` values.

[[address-dw-errors]]
== Address DataWeave Errors

> When your DataWeave code contains a syntactic or semantic error, Anypoint Code Builder highlights the error and offers a suggested fix.

Author: ```suggestion
When your DataWeave code contains a syntactic or semantic error, Anypoint Code Builder highlights the error and offers a suggested fix. Issues include:
```

> You can troubleshoot the following issues:

Author: ```suggestion
```

----

[[fix-dw-error]]
=== Fix an Undefined Function Error

Anypoint Code Builder flags undefined functions automatically.

For example, in this code, DataWeave flags an error with `toUpper`:

image::dw-error.png["Undefined function error"]

When you place your cursor on the function, DataWeave provides information about the error:

image::undefined-function.png["Information about the undefined function error"]

To fix this issue:

. Click the error to display the popup.
. Click *Quick Fix*, and then click *Create Function*.
+
Anypoint Code Builder automatically adds a function definition with the `???` placeholder for you to define your function:
+
[source,DataWeave]
fun toUpper(param0: String) = ???

. Update the function to use the `upper` function to return the provided String in uppercase characters:
+
[source,DataWeave]
--
<set-payload value="#[%dw 2.0
fun toUpper(param0: String) = upper(param0)
output application/json
---
toUpper('hello')]" doc:name="Set payload" doc:id="xiyfpa" />
--

[[import-library]]
== Import a DataWeave Library

Use Anypoint Code Builder to import DataWeave libraries from Exchange into your Mule application.

> A DataWeave library is a reusable package of DataWeave modules and mapping files, and resource files, such as JSON, XML, and CSV.

Author: ```suggestion
A DataWeave library is a reusable package of DataWeave modules, mapping files, and resource files, such as JSON, XML, and CSV files.
```
